

Hello Enzo,
some years ago I also used a dedicated UML tool (MagicDraw) for creating
UML models. But I found it has only a limited use:
- I use an IDE all the day and have to switch to a different tool
(different key bindings, mouse centered instead of keyboard centered,
another licence to request and maintain, ...)
- hard to merge when somebody else also changed the model
- much harder to match with existing code
- lacks much of the comfort and andvanced features every IDE offers:
good VCS integration, key bindings, support for Markdown, Asciidoc etc,
- finding stuff with advanced search
- good refactoring support
- integrated "reporting" with "templates" to generate the Architecture
Documentation as PDF didn't work at all and the templates had to be
maintained by yet another tool
- lots of stuff I've already forgotten

At the and of the day the model got created at the beginning and then
not maintained anymore so that they became useless.

Much better works doing architecture documentation using the arc42
Asciidoc template, Asciidoc-PlantUML integration and IDE integration for
all of that. All the documentation is stored next to the source code,
VCS integration (incl. merging) is best, all information is right at
your fingertips in the IDE just as you need it.

I wanted to explain this before I'm going to answer your feedback so you
understand my rationale of suggesting more low end tools instead of a
"interactive modelling tool" - whatever this means, because the IDE
plugins render the (HTML-) views of the Asciidoc/PlantUML source so that
it is also kind of "interactive". So to start with your first question:
no, personally I'm not sharing your opinion that for architectures
interactive modelling tools are the best choise. I don't know any of
them which integrate pictures and text very well. And especially for an
architecture documentation needs text to explain and describe. Most
parts of any arch doc template I know are text. So Asciidoc/PlantUML is
the best fit I think. And that explains why I don't know any interactive
modelling tool that integrates in a living architecture workflow.

XMI is basically XML. So the task would be to import XML into Neo4j. You
could for example use jQAssistant for that, jQA comes with an XML plugin
out of the box. As I did not look at the interactive modelling tools for
a long time, I don't know if any of them is able to import/export
from/to Neo4j directly. That would be to have a central database for the
model.

"interactive modelling tool for PlantUML" - as I said: I'm happy with
IDE integration. Maybe you find something that matches your needs on the
plantuml.com homepage: http://plantuml.com/running There are really lots
of tools and integrations listed.

Of course you could also do a kind of re-engineering as you suggested.
jQAssistant e.g. offers the Asciidoc report as described here:
https://github.com/jqassistant-contrib/jqassistant-asciidoc-report-plugin
with examples here:
https://github.com/buschmais/spring-petclinic
But note: due to a AsciidoctorJ version conflict, the Asciidoc report
plugin does currently not work when using my Asciidoc scanning plugin
and vice versa. The conflict is resolved in upcoming jQA 1.4 version.

Or use something like Structurizr - together with some popular template
(Structurizr also suggests arc42 here).

But this works of course only for visualizing the current state. The
main point in my blog post is that you define the desired architecture
and than check it via CI build - and break the build when there are
violations. So I suggest for exploring the Asciidoc+PlantUML *report*,
but for enforcing a defined architecture the Asciidoc+PlantUML *scanning*.

I hope I could help somewhat. Despite the fact that I could not present
a solution with an interactive modelling tool integrated in the workflow
I described in the post, I hope I could share some of my learnings of
working with living architecture documentation in the day-to-day job as
a coding architect.

Best regards,
Jens


-- 
-  Kontext E steht f체r Weltoffenheit und Toleranz  -

Anschrift | Kontext E GmbH | Dr.-K체lz-Ring 15 | D - 01067 Dresden
Unternehmenssitz: Dresden | Gesch채ftsf체hrung: Jens Homann | Handelsregister
Dresden: HRB 18172

